Packet tracer
It is a network simulator software . 

Switch is a device used to connect multiple devices such as laptops and computers.

You cannot assign Network ID or Broadcast ID to any computer.
Network ID - 192.168.1.0 
Router IP - 192.168.1.1
Broadcast ID - 192.168.1.255

In subnetting we can split network.
For exmaple : A company has Sales , HR , Development departments. They all are connected in the same Network which all of them can communicate with each other. But we want them not to communicate with other departments . If we use multiple routers , then it will cost a lot . So there is a solution which we call it as subnetting .We can split the network into 2 or 3 or more .

255.255.255.224 - CSM (Custom Subnet Mask)
255.255.255.128 - Subnet Mask will be common for both networks

Public IP is assigned by our ISP during the configuration of our router and it cannot be changed.

Every Router will have a public ip . While data packets sent from our Network to Internet , at the router our private ip will be changed to public ip when data packets sent outside.


Public IP is unique , whereas Private IP may be same as ours for someone else only if the host is from different network.

Router will find which is the shortest path as well as less traffic path and send the data packets.

Router Ports :

Interface Port - It is used to connect a router with another device such as switch , router , computer . 
-Types
1)Ethernet Interface - old and slow
2)Fast Ethernet Interface - new and fast
3)Giga Bit Ethernet Interface - new and advanced 
4)Serial Interface - is used to connect a router with another router 

When we connect router with switch , we go with Fast Ethernet.
When we connect router with another router , we go with Serial Interface.


Line Port - It is used to configure a router.
-Types 
1)Console Port - It is used for direct configuration , where we directly connect router to our computer and configure.

2)Auxillary Port - It is used for remote configuration , which means the router is far away from you , and you can configure it remotely using auxilary port.

NID - Network ID
conf t - Configure Terminal

Router Modes - CLI

ROUTER > Enable  - UserMode/LoginMode (Type enable to get into privilage mode)
ROUTER#  - Privilage mode (we can't do changes but we can see information)
ROUTER# - conf t  (this cmd will take you to the configuration mode)
ROUTER(CONFIG)#  - this mode is called Global Configuration Mode .

Assign IP to a Router :
interface FastEthernet 0/0
192.168.1.1 255.255.255.0

Assign/Change password to a Router :
line console 0
password cisco
login

Assign/Change password to Telnet/Terminal :
line vty 0 4
password cisco
login


ROUTING 
-types
1)Static Routing - It is the process of filling unknown network in ip table.
Used in smaller Network.

2)Dynamic Routing - It is the process of filling known network in ip table.
Used in larger Network.

IP Table
*Every Router will have a memory , where they store ip addresses in IP Table.
IP table have ip addresses , known NID , unknown NID.
*Known network ID means which are directly connected to router . directly connected means the inferface directly start from the router .
*Unknown network ID means which are not directly connected to a router . not directly means the connection will come from another router to one router .  


"We do Routing , so that routers could communicate"

Dynamic Routing
1)Distance Vector Protocol (RIP)- old. It considers HOP count , as minimum HOP count is the best path.

2)Link State Protocol (OSPF)- It considers Bandwidth , means it will check which route have maximum badwidth and travel in that route.

3)Advanced Distance Vector Protocol (EIGRP)- most commonly used. It will consider Bandwidth + Delay (time taken) .
EIGRP - Enhanced Interior Gateway Protocol


SWITCHING

Switch Ports - Based on functionality , there are 2 ports.
1)Access Port - used to connect switch with another device.
2)Trunk Port -  used to connect switch with another switch.


Disadvantages of Subnetting 
-Time consuming
-Increases the workload of network / system admin

VLAN
Configuration done in switch.

VLAN Configuration Steps
1) Create VLAN Number
2) Create VLAN Name
3) Choose an interface of Switch
4) Configure the interface (Access/Trunk)
5) Link the interface with VLAN (VLAN Membership)


ACL - configuration done in router.
It will control incoming and outgoing traffic , by permit or deny the traffic.
It is of two types .

1) Standard ACL - It is old and not in use. This can be configured for smaller network . Number ranges from 0-99. Configured close to destination. It will permit or deny traffic based on source ip.

2) Extended ACL - It is new and currently in use. This can be configured for larger network. Number ranges from 100-199. Configured close to source. It will permit traffic based on source ip , destination ip , port no and protocol.


NAT - Network Adrress Translation
Every companies will have a main server and sub servers . They don't want us to see their main server ip or other details . So there NAT will come into action . What NAT will do is , that it will change the ip when it go outside. For example : When we ping google server , we'll get reply from google but the ip shown is not their actual main server ip . NAT will change the ip and send it to us. 


FIREWALL
-Types 
1) Stateful Firewall
2) Stateless FIrewall

CISCO ASA FIREWALL 5505
-Key Points
1)We can't assign ip directly to any interface of firewall.
2)We have to assign ip to vlan and then we have link the vlan to any interface , so that the ip get indirectly assigned to the interface. 
3)In side the LAN , the network will be called as inside LAN .
4) Outside the network , will be called as Outside LAN. 
5)VLAN 1 - INSIDE - SEC LVL 100 - ETHERNET 0/1
6)VLAN2 - OUTSIDE - SEC LVL 0 - ETHERNET 0/0

*Traffic goes from inside our firewall to outside will be easy , because the Security Lvl is 100 .

*If Traffic comes from outide the firewall to inside , then it will be tough , which means lots of inspections will happen because the security lvl is 0.


Extended Named ACL - Instead of numbers we have to give Alphabets.






































